Change log for the Analytics Rules Plugin [PAB-4848] (#3405)
SoftwareAG/c8y-docs: content/change-logs/analytics/apama-in-c8y-20250603-Analytics-rules-plugin-to-create-and-manage-rules-from-device-and-groups-contexts.md

---
date:

> title: New Analytics rules plugin enables creation and management of Analytics Builder instances from device and group contexts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: New Analytics rules plugin is in Public Preview
```

> title: New Analytics rules plugin enables creation and management of Analytics Builder instances from device and groups contexts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: New Analytics rules plugin enables creation and management of Analytics Builder instances from device and group contexts.
```

change_type:
  - value: change-pXAlHAWka
    label: Preview
product_area: Analytics
component:
  - value: component-M5-cepIIS
    label: Streaming Analytics
build_artifact:
  - value: tc-KXXmo2SUR
    label: apama-in-c8y
ticket: PAB-4742
version: 26.106.0
---

Analytics rules plugin extends Analytics Builder capabilities within Streaming Analytics by enabling users to create and manage analytics builder instances directly from device and group contexts within applications such as Device Management and Cockpit.

> For more details about the Analytics rules plugin, refer to [Analytics rules plugin](/streaming-analytics/analytics-rules-plugin#what-is-analytics-rules-plugin).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more details about the Analytics rules plugin, refer to [Analytics rules plugin](https://cumulocity.com/docs/streaming-analytics/analytics-rules-plugin#what-is-analytics-rules-plugin).
```

> Introduced the Analytics Rules plugin that enables users to create and manage analytics rules directly from device and group contexts within Device Management and Cockpit applications. Instead of switching between applications, users can create analytics rules from the context they are already working in, making the process more intuitive and efficient. The plugin supports models configured with "From Context" template parameters and maintains seamless bidirectional integration with the Analytics Builder instance editor.

Reviewer: Please use content from the other doc PR we have on apama-in-c8y branch. ex: https://github.com/Cumulocity-IoT/apama-in-c8y/blob/b72c4981224c3f03d914c3a8e98cd2cbfd13f87c/src/web-app/extensions/analytics-instances/README.md?plain=1#L3
